ESPRESSO MAGAZINE INTERVIEW — KEY QUOTES
Zach Mainen, 2022
Topic: VR, Psychedelics, and AI

---

ON HOW VR WORKS:

"What makes VR special is that when you move your head, the VR has a way of
sensing your movement and very quickly it changes what you see as if you were in
a room."

"The word I like is transparent. The screen is there, but you don't see the
screen. You see as if the screen were not there, into this virtual world."

"Seeing is not just light coming into the retinas. Seeing is also your brain
piecing together information when you move your eyes or you move your head or you
move your body."


ON VR AND THERAPY:

"If you are afraid of heights, in VR you'll be terrified of a VR cliff. You
don't need to go to a cliff. We have virtual spiders and virtual cliffs."

"With therapies in general in mental health, we usually do not know anything
about why it works. We use them because we know they work, not because we think
they should work."


ON ARTIFICIAL PSYCHEDELICS:

"I think it will be possible to create drug-like effects from digital technology,
but we're only beginning to understand how one might do that. There's great
potential, but it's very early days."

"You can already think of social media or some types of video games as acting in
a way like drugs. They produce effects which lead to compulsive checking
behavior."

"Our brains are capable of abstraction. Dogs' brains and cats' brains do not get
addicted to social media because they can't make sense of digital media, but we
can."


ON AI AND BRAIN STATES:

"One could imagine using artificial intelligence not to increase clicks, but to
produce brain states that were more desirable."

"TikTok is the most advanced social media apparently. What they're trying to do
is they don't have access to your brain, but they know you clicked or you stayed
on my website longer, and so they have AI-powered machines trying to manipulate
the content in order to maximize how long you stay."

"If our objective was to change the brain state to something that people think is
good — which is a big question, right? What is that? Is a psychedelic state
good? — we're getting into ethical, philosophical questions about who would use
that technology, who would control it, how it would be regulated. But it's
coming."


ON THE FUTURE:

"AI is currently undergoing a revolution. It's incredible what's happening. And
when those systems start to be hooked up to people in more ways, there will be
big consequences."
